first draft for modules (#24)
smlhelp/book: src/concepts/mods.md

# Modules
Sometimes, we are interested in developing large projects. Large codebases are
oftentimes convoluted and impenetrable to outside scrutiny, being solely
understandable by the original author. It is thus in our best interest to
develop good coding practices - consisting of clean, commented code that
communicates its cause clearly, as well as a _modular_ structure that allows
understanding what each part of the codebase should do. For instance, we would

> not want to simply dump all of our code into a single file, having it number

Reviewer: ```suggestion
not want to simply dump all of our code into a single file with
```

Reviewer: just felt a lil verbose

piece of software for a given client, or trying to interface with some existing
computer system, it is often the case that it is only prudent to focus on those
details that are _relevant to the problem_. It takes time and mental energy to
internalize every last detail of a codebase, and it is a waste of time to try
and do so every time that one wants to make a patch. As such, we rely on
abstraction in order to keep the amount of relevant information low.

Consider the computer. It is a complicated, convoluted work of machinery and
circuitry - at its most fundamental level being comprised of logic gates and
incredible networks of interacting parts. Although an action as simple as
opening up a notepad seems very intuitive to the user, under the hood it is
anything but. The key, however, is that the user of a computer need not
understand the underlying hardware and circuitry - indeed, they need not even
know what circuitry is! In the general case,
the user of a computer does not _really_ know how it functions.

Yet again, it is also unlikely that it is important for you to know. A user of a
computer does not need to know precisely how it works to know that they can type

> a query into Google to gain information about something that they would like to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a query into Google
```

Reviewer: again felt a lil verbose

> know. The only details that are _relevant to the user_ are the devices that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. The only details that are _relevant to the user_ are the devices that
```

its dependencies do not exist. Indeed, we cannot perform such a substitution at
all in the case where a function is in any way defined beyond its own function
body itself.

We don't want to outlaw such practices, however - we simply need to make our
_abstraction boundaries_ more explicit. When we have a package or otherwise
standalone bundle of software, we should be able to use all of its components
that are muutally dependent on each other - not just make our distinctions at
the function level. We will do so using SML's module system.

## Modules: Basics

SML takes both the ideas of the _specification_ and the _implementation_ and
provides a way of codifying both within the language itself. Of course, it is
rather difficult to say "implement the list reversal function in \( O(n) \) asymptotic
time in \( n \), the length of the list" in code<a
href="#footnote1">_<sup>[1]</sup>_</a>, so SML will only deal with
specifications at the _type-level_. That is, within SML itself, a specification
for a function is simply a type for that function.

The term for a specification in SML is called a _signature_. Our running example

> throughout this section will be of the specification and implementation of a

Reviewer 2: I was personally confused because I didn't realize "section" wasn't referring to the entire section of the textbook. could replace this sentence with just "consider the specification and implementation of a package for modular arithmetic"

package for modular arithmetic. Note that the comments are optional.

```sml
signature MOD_ARITH =
sig

>     (* mod_add should be such that mod_add n x y = (x + y) mod n *)

Reviewer 2: perhaps write `(* ENSURES: mod_add n x y = (x + y) mod n`
instead?

    val mod_add : int -> int -> int -> int

    (* mod_sub should be such that mod_sub n x y = (x - y) mod n *)
    val mod_sub : int -> int -> int -> int

    (* mod_times should be such that mod_times n x y = (x * y) mod n *)
    val mod_times : int -> int -> int -> int
end
```

This signature defines three functions, all of which have type `int -> int ->
int -> int`, which takes in the modulus of the operation, as well as the two
operands to the operation to be performed. While we would like an implementation
of this signature to also display the behavior outlined in the comments,
realistically there is no way to verify that this is true (why?), so the best that we
can do is ensure that an implementation provides functions with the correct
type.

Note also that this syntax is slightly different than that you have seen before
- we use `val` as if we were going to produce a val binding (with an associated
  type annotation), however we do not actually give it any definition. In truth,
you _cannot_ define a value in the signature itself, since it's impossible in

> general to check if two values are the same. You can, however, define a `type`

Reviewer 2: could possibly elaborate on this point (maybe mention equality types, and say if values were in a signature, then the compiler would have to check that multiple structures have the same value, which is not possible)

names are usually all-capitals. Additionally, it is totally fine to declare a
structure's values with `fun` instead of `val`, even if it says `val` in the
signature, as `fun` is just shorthand for producing a function value binding
anyways.

We will go over the precise meaning of the usage of the colon symbol in the
above structure later in the chapter. For now, the meaning of this code snippet
is to produce a structure _ascribing_ to the `MOD_ARITH` signature, or in other
words, implementing the `MOD_ARITH` specification. We see that it contains three
declarations, those being the functions declared in the signature itself. A key
note is that ascribing to a signature is akin to a contract - any structure
ascribing a signature _must_ implement all the requisite components described by
the signature, or it will fail to ascribe, and result in a compile-time error
(similar to an ill-typed program).

It is not, however, the case that a structure cannot provide _more_ information
than is strictly necessitated by the signature. Additional helper functions and
value bindings can be freely instantiated within a structure without affecting

> ascription. Thus, honoring a contract only entails satisfyng the terms agreed to

Reviewer 2: "satisfyng" typo. alternatively, could just cut this entire sentence; I don't think it has much purpose

in the signature, without comment on going over. We will explore this idea more
later in the chapter when we discuss information hiding.

Using structures should be something that you are already familiar with - you do
it every time that you invoke `Int.compare`. To use the fields of a structure,

> you access them using the dot operator, following the name of the structure in

Reviewer 2: maybe "you write the structure name, then a dot, and then the field of the structure"

struct
    (* pair of (x, y) coordinates *)
    type point = real * real

    val origin = (0.0, 0.0)
    fun rotate (x, y) r = (x * Math.cos r) + (y * Math.sin r)

    fun get_x (x, y) = x
    fun get_x (x, y) = y
    fun get_dist (x, y) = Math.sqrt (Math.pow (x, 2.0) + Math.pow (y, 2.0))
end

```sml
structure PolarGeo : GEOMETRY =
struct
    (* pair of (d, theta), where d is distance from origin and theta is angle from 0 degrees *)
    type point = real * real

    (* theoretically here theta could be anything *)
    val origin  = (0.0, 0.0)
    fun rotate (d, theta) r = (d, theta + r)

    fun get_x (d, theta) = d * (Math.cos theta)
    fun get_y (d, theta) = d * (Math.sin theta)
    fun get_dist (d, theta) = d
end
```

It should be relatively clear that these are two perfectly valid ways of
representing an (albeit limited) implementation of coordinate geometry. Both
have their own strengths and weaknesses, such as rectangular coordinates having
more convenient access to computing the x and y coordinates of a given point,
and polar coordinates more easily rotating points about the origin and
calculating the distance of a point from the origin. As such, it comes down to

> _context_ to determine which should be used in any given circumstance.

Reviewer 2: I am personally not 100% convinced by this example. In both structures, the client can get x and y coordinates, find the distance, and use the rotate function (with the same ease). I guess the only difference is that, since it's transparently ascribed, the client can peek at the representation of the point and do things with it that aren't specified in the structure. That feels kind of janky though (and wasn't mentioned).

I have an idea (although idk if it's much better): have something that implements the signature simply, and another more verbose version that also prints out information when the values and functions are used. although that uses side effects which might be messy

assist in code reuse and statically enforcing code dependencies. Another use of
modules in the SML module system is _information hiding_.

It is sometimes said that one of the greatest ideas in computer science is
_abstraction_. Whether it is focusing on developing an algorithm to solve a problem, a
piece of software for a given client, or trying to interface with some existing
computer system, it is often the case that it is only prudent to focus on those
details that are _relevant to the problem_. It takes time and mental energy to
internalize every last detail of a codebase, and it is a waste of time to try
and do so every time that one wants to make a patch. As such, we rely on
abstraction in order to keep the amount of relevant information low.

Consider the computer that you are likely reading this on. It is unlikely that
you know _everything_ about what happens within its case - precisely how it
interfaces with its hard drive in order to retrieve data, how the CPU
coordinates together machine instructions to simulate the thousands of processes
that are simultaneously running, or how its screen manages to turn electrical

> signals into a crisp, legible picture.

Reviewer 2: lines 266-271 seem redundant due to the example given later in lines 274-289

by an outside client are those described within the signature.

Practically, this means that the use of "helper functions" in the implementation
of a structure is hidden from the client. This means that in the following
signature and structure:

```sml
signature REVERSE =
sig
    val reverse : 'a list -> 'a list
end

structure Reverse : REVERSE =
struct
    fun trev [] acc = acc
      | trev (x::xs) acc = trev xs (x::acc)

    fun reverse L = trev L []
end
```

only the value `reverse` is visible to the user of the `Reverse` structure. This
can be convenient in enforcing abstraction, because we could be writing a
program that uses helper functions that have certain preconditions. Through
restricting the usage of those helper functions, the client is blocked from
constructing certain inputs to those functions that may violate those
preconditions, resulting in unallowed behavior.

We have used the term "ascription" several times so far in this chapter,
referring to how a structure "implements" a signature, similarly to how a value
has a certain type. In reality, there are two kinds of ascription: transparent
and opaque. To demonstrate the difference, we will consider the following

> implementation of arrays.

Reviewer 2: specify 2D arrays

> **[Opaque ascription]**: Ascribing a structure to a signature where all
> abstract types are hidden to the user of the structure.

By "hidden", we mean precisely in the same way that the abstract types are
"visible" in transparent ascription. Abstract types are truly that, _abstract_,
and thus the user of either the `RectArray` or `ListArray` structure are
incapable of knowing precisely what either the `'a ListArray.array` or `'a
RectArray.array` types are. The only way to construct a value of type `'a
array`, from either structure, is by using either respective `new` function, and
similarly with manipulating an existing array.

Why would we want to have opaque ascription? This is precisely for the reason
that we have been motivating for the entire chapter, which is abstraction. A
fundamental idea of having a powerful type system is to _make illegal states
unrepresentable_. Instead of having a precondition that must be obeyed in a
given function, we instead would like it so that the type system enforces these
preconditions for us instead - similarly to how for a function of type `int ->
int` with precondition "TRUE", if we were to instead write it in a dynamically

> typed ("typeless") language, we may instead say that it has a precondition that

Reviewer 2: this analogy is a little strange imo. I really like the example you provide later about a "bad" 2D array and think that is self explanatory

behavior to what we should expect them to do.

**NOTE**: Sometimes, there are constraints beyond simply being the same

> "mathematical function" - that is, defining the same outputs on the same inputs.and

Reviewer 2: oops?
